Data Analyst (Digital Marketer) We are an independent non-profit newsroom that develops investigative journalism – a public interest task that promotes free, capable media and open, accountable, just democracy. We do so via: Investigations: Developing best practice by doing stories that are accurate and fair, advance methods and standards, expose wrongdoing and empower people to hold power to account. Investigations support: Helping others do it too via editorial collaboration and training. Advocacy: Campaigning, exercising laws and litigating to help secure the information rights – access to information and media freedoms – that are the lifeblood of our field. We are based in Johannesburg, Durban and Cape Town. We publish via amaBhungane.org and a range of publication partners. We pay our bills from reader contributions – our amaB Supporters – and foundational grants. We are looking to appoint a data & digital analyst to work across our digital publication and operating portfolios. The ideal candidate is highly skilled at collecting and managing data from various platforms and interpreting it to inform publication and managerial strategies. The position requires a digitally-savvy innovator who is self-motivated and communicates well. This is a new role. Purpose: To provide the team with data and digital support. Key responsibilities: Digital publication portfolio – supporting the team with data and insight to serve and grow our readership Operating portfolio – supporting management with data and insight to serve and grow our supporter base Across portfolios Skills required: The successful applicant will preferably be based in Johannesburg; will support the digital and operating coordinators; and will report to the managing partners. A competitive remuneration package is offered. Individuals from a previously disadvantaged background are encouraged to apply. Please email your CV and a short letter of motivation to lizels@amabhungane.org by 30 June 2021. The CV and letter should speak to the above criteria. Only shortlisted candidates will be contacted.